
=head1 NAME

perltidy - a Perl script indenter and reformatter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    perltidy [ options ] file1 file2 file3 ...
            (output goes to file1.tdy, file2.tdy, file3.tdy, ...)
    perltidy [ options ] file1 -o outfile
    perltidy [ options ] file1 -st >outfile
    perltidy [ options ] <infile >outfile

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Perltidy reads a Perl script and writes an indented, reformatted script.
The default formatting tries to follow the recommendations in perlstyle(1).

Many users will find enough information in L<"EXAMPLES"> to get 
started.  New users may benefit from the short tutorial which
comes with the distribution.

The formatting can be controlled in detail with numerous input parameters, 
which are described in L<"OPTIONS">.  

=head1 EXAMPLES

  perltidy somefile.pl

This will produce a file F<somefile.pl.tdy> containing the script reformatted
using the default options, which approximate the style suggested in 
perlstyle(1).  Perltidy never changes the input file.

  perltidy *.pl

Execute perltidy on all .pl files in the current directory with the
default options.  The output will be in files with an appended F<.tdy>
extension.  For any file with an error, there will be a file with extension
F<.ERR>.

  perltidy -gnu somefile.pl

Execute perltidy on file F<somefile.pl> with a style which approximates the
GNU Coding Standards for C programs.  The output will be F<somefile.pl.tdy>.

  perltidy -i=3 somefile.pl

Execute perltidy on file F<somefile.pl>, with 3 columns for each level of
indentation (B<-i=3>) instead of the default 4 columns.  There will not be any
tabs in the reformatted script, except for any which already exist in comments,
pod documents, quotes, and here documents.  Output will be F<somefile.pl.tdy>. 

  perltidy -i=3 -t somefile.pl

Same as the previous example, except that each set of 3 columns of indentation
(B<-i=3>) will be represented by one leading tab character (B<-t>).

  perltidy -ce -l=72 somefile.pl

Execute perltidy on file F<somefile.pl> with all defaults except use "cuddled
elses" (B<-ce>) and a maximum line length of 72 columns (B<-l=72>) instead of
the default 80 columns.  

  perltidy -g somefile.pl

Execute perltidy on file F<somefile.pl> and save a log file F<somefile.pl.LOG>
which shows the nesting of braces, parentheses, and square brackets at
the start of every line.

=head1 OPTIONS

The entire command line is scanned for options, and they are processed
before any files are processed.  As a result, it does not matter
whether flags are before or after any filenames.  However, the relative
order of parameters is important, with later parameters overriding the
values of earlier parameters.

For each parameter, there is a long name and a short name.  The short
names are convenient for keyboard input, while the long names are
self-documenting and therefore useful in scripts.  It is customary to
use two leading dashes for long names, but one may be used.

Most parameters which serve as on/off flags can be negated with a
leading "n" (for the short name) or a leading "no" (for the long
name).  For example, the flag to use tabs is B<-t> or B<--tabs>.  The
flag to use no tabs (the default) is B<-nt> or B<--notabs>.

Options may not be bundled together.  In other words, options B<-q> and
B<-g> may NOT be entered as B<-qg>.

Option names may be terminated early as long as they are uniquely identified.
For example, instead of B<-dump-token-types>, it would be sufficient to enter
B<-dump-tok>, or even B<-dump-t>, to uniquely identify this command.

=head2 I/O control

=over 4

=item B<-h>,    B<--help> 

Show summary of usage and exit.

=item	B<-o>=filename,    B<--outfile>=filename  

Name of the output file (only if a single input file is being
processed).  If no output file is specified, and output is not
redirected to the standard output, the output will go to F<filename.tdy>.

=item	B<-st>,    B<--standard-output>

Perltidy must be able to operate on an arbitrarily large number of files
in a single run, with each output being directed to a different output
file.  Obviously this would conflict with outputting to the single
standard output device, so a special flag, B<-st>, is required to
request outputting to the standard output.  For example,

  perltidy somefile.pl -st >somefile.new.pl

This option may only be used if there is just a single input file.  When
this option is used, perltidy will have to create a temporary copy of
the output file, perltidy.TMPO, to feed to perl for syntax checking,
unless allow syntax checking is disabled.  This file will be deleted
when the job finishes.  The default is B<-nst> or B<-nostandard-output>.

=item	B<-se>,    B<--standard-error-output>

If perltidy detects an error when processing file F<somefile.pl>, its
default behavior is to write error messages to file F<somefile.pl.ERR>.
Use B<-se> to cause all error meassages to be sent to the standard error
output stream instead.  This directive may be negated with B<-nse>. 
Thus, you may place B<-se> in a F<.perltidyrc> and override it
when desired with B<-nse> on the command line.

=item B<-w>,    B<--warning-output>             

Setting B<-w> causes perltidy to include any non-critical warning
messages be reported as errors.  These include messages
about possible pod problems, possibly bad starting indentation level,
and cautions about indirect object usage.  The default, B<-nw> or
B<--nowarning-output>, is not to include these warnings.

=item B<-q>,    B<--quiet>             

Deactivate error messages and syntax checking (for running under
an editor). 

For example, if you use a vi-style editor, such as vim, you may execute
perltidy as a filter from within the editor using something like

 :n1,n2!perltidy -q

where C<n1,n2> represents the selected text.  Without the B<-q> flag,
any error messages will mess up your screen.  Besides, it is common to
run perltidy on incomplete blocks from an editor, and you don't want to
see any complaints about that.  (Or maybe you do; in that case, be
prepared to use your "undo" key).

=item B<-syn>,   B<--check-syntax>      

This causes perltidy to run C<perl -c> to check syntax of input and output.
This is the default and highly recommended.  The results are written to the
F<.LOG> file, which will be saved if an error is detected in the output script.
The output script is not checked if the input script has a syntax error.  To
skip syntax checking, use B<-nsyn> or B<--nocheck-syntax>.  Syntax checking is
also deactivated by the B<--quiet> flag, discussed above.

=item B<-log>,    B<--logfile>           

Save the F<.LOG> file, which has many useful diagnostics.  Perltidy always
creates a F<.LOG> file, but by default it is deleted unless a program bug is
suspected.  Setting the B<-log> flag forces the log file to be saved.

=item B<-g=n>, B<--logfile-gap=n>

Set maximum interval between input code lines in the logfile.  This purpose of
this flag is to assist in debugging nesting errors.  The value of C<n> is
optional.  If you set the flag B<-g> without the value of C<n>, it will be
taken to be 1, meaning that every line will be written to the log file.  This
can be helpful if you are looking for a brace, paren, or bracket nesting error. 

Setting B<-g> also causes the logfile to be saved, so it is not necessary to
also include B<-log>. 

If no B<-g> flag is given, a value of 50 will be used, meaning that at least
every 50th line will be recorded in the logfile.  This helps prevent
excessively long log files.  

Setting a negative value of C<n> is the same as not setting B<-g> at all.

=item B<-npro>  B<--noprofile>    

Ignore any F<.perltidyrc> command file.  Normally, perltidy looks first in
your current directory for a F<.perltidyrc> file of parameters.  (The format
is described below).  If it finds one, it applies those options to the
initial default values, and then it applies any that have been defined
on the command line.  If no F<.perltidyrc> file is found, it looks for one
in your home directory.

If you set the B<-npro> flag, perltidy will not look for this file.

=item B<-opt>,   B<--show-options>      

Write a list of all options used to the F<.LOG> file.  This is useful for
debugging command files.  In the list, the status of on/off
switches is indicated by a 0 for off and a 1 for on.  Please see
B<--dump-options> for a simpler way to do this.

=item B<-f>,   B<--force-read-binary>      

Force perltidy to process binary files.  Normally, perltidy skips files
identified by the system as non-text.  This flag causes all existing
files to be processed.

=back

=head2 Basic Options

=over 4

=item B<-i=n>,  B<--indent-columns=n>  

Use n columns per indentation level (default n=4).

See also B<--tabs>.

=item B<-t>,   B<--tabs>

This flag defines the characters used to indicate the indentation level
of each line of code to be tabs.  Perltidy allows two possible ways to
represent the indentation at the beginning of each line of code.  You
may either use one tab character per level of indentation (signified
with the -t flag), or you may use n real space characters per level,
(where n is defined by the -i flag).  The choice depends upon which is
most convenient for your editor or viewer.  The default is to use ASCII
space characters because they should be properly displayed on all
editors or viewers, even though they are not always the most convenient
for editing. Of course, you can always rerun perltidy to change the
indentation characters.

If you choose tabs, you will want to give the appropriate setting to
your editor to display tabs as 4 blanks (or whatever value has been set
with the B<-i> command).  

Except for these possible tab indentation characters, Perltidy does not
introduce any tab characters into your file, and it removes any tabs
from the code (unless requested not to do so with B<-fws>).  If you have
any tabs in your comments, quotes, or here-documents, they will remain.

=item B<-nt>,   B<--notabs>

Use space (blank) characters instead of tabs for leading indentation.
This is the default, following the recommendation in perlstyle(1),
although some programmers will prefer tabs.

=item B<-io>,   B<--indent-only>       

This flag is used to deactivate all formatting and line break changes.
When it is in effect, the only change to the script will be indentation.
And any flags controlling whitespace and newlines will be ignored.  You
might want to use this if you are perfectly happy with your whitespace
and line breaks, and merely want perltidy to handle the indentation.
(This also speeds up perltidy by about a factor of two, so it might be
useful when perltidy is merely being used to help find a brace error in
a large script).

Setting this flag is equivalent to setting B<--freeze-newlines> and
B<--freeze-whitespace>.

=back

=head2 Whitespace Control

=over 4

=item B<-fws>,  B<--freeze-whitespace>

This flag causes your original whitespace to remain unchanged, and
causes the rest of the whitespace commands in this section to be
ignored.

=item Tightness of curly braces, parentheses, and square brackets.

Here the term "tightness" will mean the closeness with which
pairs of enclosing tokens, such as parentheses, contain the quantities
within.  A numerical value of 0, 1, or 2 defines the tightness, with
0 being least tight and 2 being most tight.

The B<-pt=n> or B<--paren-tightness> parameter controls the space within
parens.  The example below shows the effect of the three possible
values, 0, 1, and 2:

 if ( ( my $len_tab = length( $tabstr ) ) > 0 ) {  # -pt=0
 if ( ( my $len_tab = length($tabstr) ) > 0 ) {    # -pt=1 (default)
 if ((my $len_tab = length($tabstr)) > 0) {        # -pt=2

When n is 0, there is always a space to the right of a '(' and to the left
of a ')'.  For n=2 there is never a space.  For n=1, the default, there
is a space unless the quantity within the parens is a single token, such
as an identifier or quoted string.  

Likewise, the parameter B<-sbt=n> or B<--square-bracket-tightness>
controls the space within square brackets, as illustrated below.

 $width = $col[ $j + $k ] - $col[ $j ];  # -sbt=0
 $width = $col[ $j + $k ] - $col[$j];    # -sbt=1 (default)
 $width = $col[$j + $k] - $col[$j];      # -sbt=2 

Curly braces which do not contain code blocks are controlled by
the parameter B<-bt=n> or B<--brace-tightness=n>. 

 $obj->{ $parsed_sql->{ 'table' }[0] };    # -bt=0
 $obj->{ $parsed_sql->{'table'}[0] };      # -bt=1 (default)
 $obj->{$parsed_sql->{'table'}[0]};        # -bt=2

And finally, curly braces which contain blocks of code are controlled by the
parameter B<-bbt=n> or B<--block-brace-tightness=n> as illustrated in the
example below.   

 %bf = map { $_ => -M $_ } grep { /\.deb$/ } dirents '.'; # -bbt=0 (default)
 %bf = map { $_ => -M $_ } grep {/\.deb$/} dirents '.';   # -bbt=1
 %bf = map {$_ => -M $_} grep {/\.deb$/} dirents '.';     # -bbt=2

=item B<-ci=n>, B<--continuation-indentation=n>

Continuation indentation is extra indentation spaces applied when
a long line is broken.  The default is n=2, illustrated here:

 my $level =   # -ci=2      
   ( $max_index_to_go >= 0 ) ? $levels_to_go[0] : $last_output_level;

The same example, with n=0, is a little harder to read:

 my $level =   # -ci=0    
 ( $max_index_to_go >= 0 ) ? $levels_to_go[0] : $last_output_level;

=item List indentation using B<-lp>, B<--line-up-parentheses>

By default, perltidy indents lists with 4 spaces, or whatever value
is specified with B<-i=n>.  Here is a small list formatted in this way:

    @month_of_year = (
        'Jan', 'Feb', 'Mar', 'Apr', 'May', 'Jun', 'Jul', 'Aug', 'Sep', 'Oct',
        'Nov', 'Dec'
    );

Use the B<-lp> flag to add extra indentation to cause the data to begin
past the opening parentheses of a sub call or list, or opening square
bracket of an anonymous array, or opening curly brace of an anonymous
hash.  With this option set, the above list would become:

    @month_of_year = (
                       'Jan', 'Feb', 'Mar', 'Apr', 'May', 'Jun', 'Jul', 'Aug',
                       'Sep', 'Oct', 'Nov', 'Dec'
    );

If the available line length (see B<-l=n> ) does not permit this much 
space, perltidy will use less.  

This option has no effect on code BLOCKS, such as if/then/else blocks,
which always use whatever is specified with B<-i=n>.  Also, the
existance of line breaks and/or block comments between the opening and
closing parens may cause perltidy to temporarily revert to its default
method.

Note: The B<-lp> option may not be used together with the B<-t> tabs option.
If B<-t> is specified, it will be ignored.

In addition, any parameter which restricts the ability of perltidy to
choose newlines will all conflict with B<-lp> and will cause B<-lp> to
be deactivated.  These include 
B<-io>, B<-fnl>, B<-nanl>, and B<-ndnl>.

=item B<-icp>, B<--indent-closing-paren>

The B<-icp> option leaves a list-termination line of the form C<);>, C<};>,
or C<];> indented with the same indentation as the previous line.  The
previous example with B<-icp> would give,

    @month_of_year = (          # -icp
        'Jan', 'Feb', 'Mar', 'Apr', 'May', 'Jun', 'Jul', 'Aug', 'Sep', 'Oct',
        'Nov', 'Dec'
        );

=item B<-icb>, B<--indent-closing-brace>

The B<-icb> option leaves a brace which terminates a code block 
indented with the same indentation as the previous line.  For example,

        if ($task) {
            yyy();
            }    # -icb
        else {
            zzz();
            }

The default is not to do this, indicated by B<-nicb>.

=item B<-ibc>,  B<--indent-block-comments>

Block comments, meaning full-line comments, normally look best when they
are indented to the same level as the code which follows them.  This is
the default behavior, but you may use B<-nibc> to keep block comments
left-justified.  Here is an example:

             # this comment is indented      (-ibc, default)
	     if ($task) { yyy(); }

=item B<-nibc>,  B<--noindent-block-comments>

Do not indent block comments.  Here is an example:

 # this comment is not indented              (-nibc)
	     if ($task) { yyy(); }

=item B<-hsc>, B<--hanging-side-comments>

By default, perltidy tries to identify and align "hanging side
comments", which are something like this:

        my $IGNORE = 0;    # This is a side comment
                           # This is a hanging side comment
                           # And so is this

A comment is considered to be a hanging side comment if it immediately
follows a line with a side comment, or another hanging side comment.
To deactivate this feature, use B<-nhsc> or B<--nohanging-side-comments>.  
If block comments are preceded by a blank line, they will not be mistaken as
hanging side comments.

=item B<-oll>, B<--outdent-long-lines>

When B<-oll> is set, lines which cannot be broken into pieces less than
the B<maximum-line-length> will have their indentation removed to make
them more readable.  This is the default.  This can mainly occur for
long quoted strings and long comments.  To prevent such out-denting, use
B<-noll> or B<--nooutdent-long-lines>.

=item B<-msc=n>,  B<minimum-space-to-comment=n>

Side comments look best when lined up several spaces to the right of
code.  Perltidy will try to keep comments at least n spaces to the
right.  The default is n=4 spaces.

=item B<-sts>,   B<--space-terminal-semicolon>

Some programmers prefer a space before all terminal semicolons.  The
default is for no such space, and is indicated with B<-nsts> or
B<--nospace-terminal-semicolon>.

	$i = 1 ;     #  -sts
	$i = 1;      #  -nsts   (default)

=item B<-sfs>,   B<--space-for-semicolon>

Semicolons within B<for> loops may sometimes be hard to see,
particularly when commas are also present.  This option places spaces on
both sides of these special semicolons, and is the default.  Use
B<-nsfs> or B<--nospace-for-semicolon> to deactivate it.

 for ( @a = @$ap, $u = shift @a ; @a ; $u = $v ) {  # -sfs (default)
 for ( @a = @$ap, $u = shift @a; @a; $u = $v ) {    # -nsfs

=item B<-asc>,  B<--add-semicolons>

Setting B<-asc> allows perltidy to add any missing optional semicolon at the end 
of a line which is followed by a closing curly brace on the next line.  This
is the default, and may be deactivated with B<-nasc> or B<--noadd-semicolons>.

=item B<-dsc>,  B<--delete-semicolons>

Setting B<-dsc> allows perltidy to delete extra semicolons which are
simply empty statements.  This is the default, and may be deactivated
with B<-ndsc> or B<--nodelete-semicolons>.  (Such semicolons are not
deleted, however, if they would promote a side comment to a block
comment).

=item B<-aws>,  B<--add-whitespace>

Setting this option allows perltidy to add certain whitespace improve
code readability.  This is the default. If you do not want any
whitespace added, but are willing to have some whitespace deleted, use
B<-naws>.  (Use B<-fws> to leave whitespace completely unchanged).

=item B<-dws>,  B<--delete-old-whitespace>

Setting this option allows perltidy to remove some old whitespace
between characters, if necessary.  This is the default.  If you
do not want any old whitespace removed, use B<-ndws> or
B<--nodelete-old-whitespace>.

=item Detailed whitespace controls

For those who want more detailed control over the whitespace around
tokens, there are four parameters which can directly modify the default
whitespace rules built into perltidy for any token.  They are:

B<-wls=s> or B<--want-left-space=s>,

B<-nwls=s> or B<--nowant-left-space=s>,

B<-wrs=s> or B<--want-right-space=s>,

B<-nwrs=s> or B<--nowant-right-space=s>.

These parameters are each followed by a quoted string, B<s>, containing a
list of token types.  No more than one of each of these parameters
should be specified, because repeating a command-line parameter
always overwrites the previous one before perltidy ever sees it.

To illustrate how these are used, suppose it is desired that there be no
space on either side of the token types B<= + - / *>.  The following two
parameters would specify this desire:

  -nwls="= + - / *"    -nwrs="= + - / *"

(Note that the token types are in quotes, and that they are separated by
spaces).  With these modified whitespace rules, the following line of math:

  $root = -$b + sqrt( $b * $b - 4. * $a * $c ) / ( 2. * $a );

becomes this:

  $root=-$b+sqrt( $b*$b-4.*$a*$c )/( 2.*$a );

These parameters should be considered to be hints to perltidy rather
than fixed rules, because perltidy must try to resolve conflicts that
arise between them and all of the other rules that it uses.  One
conflict that can arise is if, between two tokens, the left token wants
a space and the right one doesn't.  In this case, the token not wanting
a space takes priority.  

It is necessary to have a list of all token types in order to create
this type of input.  Such a list can be obtained by the command
B<-dump-token-types>.

=item Trimming whitespace around C<qw> quotes

B<-tqw> or B<--trim-qw> provide the default behavior of trimming
spaces around multiline C<qw> quotes and indenting them appropriately.

B<-ntqw> or B<--notrim-qw> cause leading and trailing whitespace around
multi-line C<qw> quotes to be left unchanged.  This option will not
normally be necessary, but was added for testing purposes, because in
some versions of perl, trimming C<qw> quotes changes the syntax tree.

=back

=head2 Line Break Control

=over 4

=item B<-fnl>,  B<--freeze-newlines>

If you do not want any changes to the line breaks in your script, set
B<-fnl>, and they will remain fixed, and the rest of the commands in
this section will be ignored.  You may want to use B<-noll>
with this.

=item B<-l=n>, B<--maximum-line-length=n>

The default maximum line length is n=80 characters.  Perltidy will try
to find line break points to keep lines below this length. However, long
quotes and side comments may cause lines to exceed this length. 
Setting B<-l=0> is equivalent to setting B<-l=(a large number)>. 

=item B<-bbc>,  B<--blanks-before-comments>

A blank line will be introduced before a full-line comment.  This is the
default.  Use B<-nbbc> or  B<--noblanks-before-comments> to prevent
such blank lines from being introduced.

=item B<-bbs>,  B<--blanks-before-subs>

A blank line will be introduced before a B<sub> definition, unless it is a
one-liner or preceded by a comment.  A blank line will also be introduced
before a B<package> statement and a B<BEGIN> and B<END> block.  This is the
default.  The intention is to help display the structure of a program by
setting off certain key sections of code.  This is negated with B<-nbbs> or
B<--noblanks-before-subs>.  

=item B<-bbb>,  B<--blanks-before-blocks>

A blank line will be introduced before blocks of coding delimited by
B<for>, B<foreach>, B<while>, B<until>, and B<if>, B<unless>, in the following
circumstances:

=over 4

=item *

The block is not preceded by a comment.

=item *

The block is not a one-line block.

=item *

The number of consecutive non-blank lines at the current indentation depth is at least B<-lbl>
(see next section).

=back

This is the default.  The intention of this option is to introduce
some space within dense coding.
This is negated with B<-nbbb> or  B<--noblanks-before-blocks>.

=item B<-lbl=n> B<--long-block-line-count=n>

This controls how often perltidy is allowed to add blank lines before 
certain block types (see previous section).  The default is 8.  Entering
a value of B<0> is equivalent to entering a very large number.

=item B<-mbl=n> B<--maximum-consecutive-blank-lines=n>   

This parameter specifies the maximum number of consecutive blank lines
in the output script.  The default is n=1.  If the input file has more
than n consecutive blank lines, the number will be reduced to n.

=item B<-sob>,  B<--swallow-optional-blank-lines>

Blank lines governed by the above flags, B<-bbb>, B<-bbs>, and B<-bbc>,
will be deleted.  (But essential blank lines above pod documents will be
retained).  This is NOT the default.

=item B<-nsob>,  B<--noswallow-optional-blank-lines>

Retain blank lines, including those which do not corresponding to flags
B<-bbb>, B<-bbs>, and B<-bbc>.  This is the default.  The number of
blanks retained is subject to the limit imposed by
B<--maximum-consecutive-blank-lines>, however.

=item B<-ce>,   B<--cuddled-else>

Enable the "cuddled else" style, in which C<else> and C<elsif> are
follow immediately after the curly brace closing the previous block.
The default is not to use cuddled elses, and is indicated with the flag
B<-nce> or B<--nocuddled-else>.  Here is a comparison of the
alternatives:

  if ($task) {
      yyy();
  } else {    # -ce
      zzz();
  }

  if ($task) {
	yyy();
  }
  else {    # -nce  (default)
	zzz();
  }

=item B<-bl>,    B<--opening-brace-on-new-line>     

Use the flag B<-bl> to place the opening brace on a new line:

  if ( $input_file eq '-' )    # -bl 
  {                          
      important_function();
  }

This flag applies to all structural blocks, including sub's (unless
the B<-sbl> flag is set -- see next item).

The default style, B<-nbl>, places an opening brace on the same line as
the keyword introducing it.  For example,

  if ( $input_file eq '-' ) {   # -nbl (default)

=item B<-sbl>,    B<--opening-sub-brace-on-new-line>     

The flag B<-sbl> can be used to override the value of B<-bl> for
opening sub braces.  For example, 

 perltidy -sbl

produces this result:

 sub foo
 {
    if (!defined($_[0])) {
        print("Hello, World\n");
    }
    else {
        print($_[0], "\n");
    }
 }

This flag is negated with B<-nsbl>.  If B<-sbl> is not specified,
the value of B<-bl> is used.

=item B<-bli>,    B<--brace-left-and-indent>     

The flag B<-bli> is the same as B<-bl> but in addition it causes one 
unit of continuation indentation ( see B<-ci> ) to be placed before 
an opening and closing brace associated with the keywords 
B<if>, B<elsif>, B<else>, B<unless>, B<for>, B<foreach>, B<sub>, 
B<while>, B<until>, and also with a preceding label.  

For example,

        if ( $input_file eq '-' )    # -bli
          {
            important_function();
          }

=item B<-bar>,    B<--opening-brace-always-on-right>     

The default style, B<-nbl> places the opening brace on a new
line if it does not fit on the same line as the opening keyword, like
this:

        if ( $bigwasteofspace1 && $bigwasteofspace2
          || $bigwasteofspace3 && $bigwasteofspace4 )
        {
            big_waste_of_time();
        }

To force the opening brace to always be on the right, use the B<-bar>
flag.  In this case, the above example becomes

        if ( $bigwasteofspace1 && $bigwasteofspace2
          || $bigwasteofspace3 && $bigwasteofspace4 ) {
            big_waste_of_time();
        }

A conflict occurs if both B<-bl> and B<-bar> are specified.

=item B<-dnl>,  B<--delete-old-newlines>

By default, perltidy first deletes all old line break locations, and then it
looks for optimal break points to match the desired line length.  Use B<-ndnl>
or  B<--nodelete-old-newlines> to force perltidy to retain all old line break
points.  

=item B<-anl>,  B<--add-newlines>

By default, perltidy will add line breaks when necessary to create
continuations of long lines and to improve the script appearance.  Use
B<-nanl> or B<-noadd-newlines> to prevent any new line breaks.  

This flag does not prevent perltidy from eliminating existing line
breaks; see B<-freeze-newlines> to completely prevent changes to line
break points.

=item Controlling whether perltidy breaks before or after operators

Two command line parameters provide some control over whether
a line break should be before or after specific token types.

B<-wba=s> or B<--want-break-after=s>, and

B<-wbb=s> or B<--want-break-before=s>.

These parameters are each followed by a quoted string, B<s>, containing
a list of token types (separated only by spaces).  No more than one of each
of these parameters should be specified, because repeating a
command-line parameter always overwrites the previous one before
perltidy ever sees it.

By default, perltidy breaks B<after> these token types:
  % + - * / x != == >= <= =~ !~ < >  | & >= <
  = **= += *= &= <<= &&= -= /= |= >>= ||= .= %= ^= x=

And perltidy breaks B<before> these token types by default:
  . << >> -> && ||

To illustrate, to cause a break after a concatenation operator, C<'.'>,
rather than before it, the command line would be

  -wba="."

As another example, the following command would cause a break before 
math operators C<'+'>, C<'-'>, C<'/'>, and C<'*'>:

  -wbb="+ - / *"

These commands should work well for most of the token types that
perltidy uses (use B<--dump-token-types> for a list).  However, 
for a few token types there may be conflicts with hardwired
logic which cause unexpected results.  An example is the comma,
which is hardwired to go at the end of lines in certain cases.
Hopefully, this restriction will be removed in the future.  Another
example is curly braces, which should be controlled with the
parameter B<bl> provided for that purpose.

=back

=head2 Styles

=over 4

=item B<-gnu>, B<--gnu-style>

B<-gnu> gives an approximation to the GNU Coding Standards (which do
not apply to perl) as they are sometimes implemented.  At present, this
style overrides the default style with the following parameters:

    -lp -bl -noll -pt=2 -bt=2 -sbt=2 -icp

=back

=head2 Other Controls

=over 4

=item Writing selected text to a file

When perltidy writes a formatted text file, it has the ability to also
send selected text to a file with a F<.TEE> extension.  This text can
include comments and pod documentation.  The relevant commands are:
B<-tac> or B<--tee-all-comments>,  B<-tbc> or  B<--tee-block-comments>,
B<-tsc> or B<--tee-side-comments>, and B<-tp> or  B<--tee-pod>.  The
negatives of these commands also work, and are the defaults.

=item Deleting selected text 

Perltidy can selectively delete comments and pod documentation.
The commands to do this are:

B<-dac> or  B<--delete-all-comments>,  B<-dbc> or  B<--delete-block-comments>, 
B<-dsc> or  B<--delete-side-comments>,
and B<-dp> or  B<--delete-pod>.  The negatives of these commands also
work, and are the defaults.  When block comments are deleted, any leading
'hash-bang' will be retained.  Also, if the B<-x> flag is used, any
system commands before a leading hash-bang will be retained (even if
they are in the form of comments).

=item Using a F<.perltidyrc> command file

If you use perltidy frequently, you probably won't be happy until you
create a F<.perltidyrc> file to avoid typing commonly-used
parameters.  Perltidy will first look in your current directory for a
command file named F<.perltidyrc>, and if it does not find one, it will
look in your home directory.  If it does not find one there, it will
look for a system-wide file F</usr/local/etc/perltidyrc>, and failing to
find one there it will look for F</etc/perltidyrc>.  Note that the
system-wide files do not have a leading dot.

This file is free format, and simply a list of parameters, just as they
would be entered on a command line.  Any number of lines may be used,
with any number of parameters per line, although it may be easiest to
read with one parameter per line.  Blank lines are ignored, and text
after a '#' is ignored to the end of a line.

Here is an example of a F<.perltidyrc> file:

  # This is a simple of a .perltidyrc configuration file
  # This implements a highly spaced style
  -se    # errors to standard error output
  -w     # show all warnings
  -bl	 # braces on new lines
  -pt=0  # parens not tight at all
  -bt=0  # braces not tight
  -sbt=0 # square brackets not tight

The parameters in the F<.perltidyrc> file are installed first, so any
parameters given on the command line will have priority over them.  

There are several options may be helpful in debugging a F<.perltidyrc>
file.  First, B<-log> will force a F<.LOG> file to be written, which
contains the path to the F<.perltidyrc> file, if any, and a listing of
its parameter settings.  Second, B<-opt> will force a F<.LOG> file to be
written with a complete listing of all option flags in use for a run,
taking into account the default settings, the F<.perltidyrc> file, plus
any command line options.  Third, the parameters in the F<.perltidyrc>
file can be ignored with the B<-npro> option.  Finally, the
commands B<-dump-options>, B<-dump-defaults>, B<-dump-long-names>,
and B<-dump-short-names>, all described below, may all be helpful.

=item Creating a new abbreviation

A special notation is available for use in a F<.perltidyrc> file
for creating an abbreviation for a group
of options.  This can be used to create a
shorthand for one or more styles which are frequently, but not always,
used.  The notation is to group the options within curly braces which
are preceded by the name of the alias (without leading dashes), like this:

	newword {
	-opt1
	-opt2
	}

where B<newword> is the abbreviation, and B<opt1>, etc, are existing parameters
I<or other abbreviations>.  The main syntax requirement is that
the new abbreviation must begin on a new line.
Space before and after the curly braces is optional.
For a
specific example, the following line

	airy {-bl -pt=0 -bt=0 -sbt=0}

could be placed in a F<.perltidyrc> file, and then invoked at will with

	perltidy -airy somefile.pl

(Either C<-airy> or C<--airy> may be used).

=item B<-sil=n> B<--starting-indentation-level=n>   

By default, perltidy examines the input file and tries to determine the
starting indentation level.  While it is often zero, it may not be
zero for a code snippet being sent from an editing session.  If the
default method does not work correctly, or you want to change the
starting level, use B<-sil=n>, to force the starting level to be n.

=item Skipping leading non-perl commands with B<-x> or B<--look-for-hash-bang>

If your script has leading lines of system commands or other text which
are not valid perl code, and which are separated from the start of the
perl code by a "hash-bang" line, ( a line of the form C<#!...perl> ),
you must use the B<-x> flag to tell perltidy not to parse and format any
lines before the "hash-bang" line.  This option also invokes perl with a
-x flag when checking the syntax.  This option was originally added to
allow perltidy to parse interactive VMS scripts, but it should be used
for any script which is normally invoked with C<perl -x>.

=item Controlling list formatting and vertical alignment

Perltidy attempts to place comma-separated arrays of values 
in tables which can be vertically aligned.  The number of
fields is, by default, chosen to be the largest even number which
fits in the current page width (defined by B<-l=n>).  Usually this
works well.

There are two ways to control this formatting.  The first is with the
use of comments or empty lines.  If there are any comments or blank
lines between the opening and closing structural brace, parenthesis, or
bracket containing the list, then the original line breaks will be used
for the entire list instead.

The second is with the parameter B<--mft=n> or
B<--maximum-fields-per-table=n>.  The default value for B<n> is a large
number, 40.  If the computed number of fields for any table exceeds
B<n>, then it will be reduced to B<n>.  While this value should probably
be left unchanged as a general rule, it might be used on a small section
of code to force a list to have a particular number of fields per line,
and then a single comment could be introduced somewhere to freeze the
formatting in future applications of perltidy, like this:

    @month_of_year = (    # -mft=2
        'Jan', 'Feb',
        'Mar', 'Apr',
        'May', 'Jun',
        'Jul', 'Aug',
        'Sep', 'Oct',
        'Nov', 'Dec'
    );

Vertical alignment refers to lining up similar tokens vertically, like
this:

 my $lines     = 0;    # checksum: #lines
 my $bytes     = 0;    # checksum: #bytes
 my $sum       = 0;    # checksum: system V sum

Once the perltidy vertical aligner "locks on" to a pattern, such as
defined by the "=" and "#" in the above example, it retains the pattern
for as long as possible.  However, a blank line or full-line comment
will cause it to forget the pattern and start looking for another.
Thus, a single blank line can be introduced to force the aligner to stop
aligning when it is undesirable.

=item  Making a file unreadable

The goal of perltidy is to improve the readability of files, but there
are two commands which have the opposite effect, B<--mangle> and
B<--extrude>.  They are actually
merely aliases for combinations of other parameters.  Both of these
strip all possible whitespace, but leave comments and pod documents,
so that they are essentially reversible.  The
difference between these is that B<--mangle> puts the fewest possible
line breaks in a script while B<--extrude> puts the maximum possible.
Note that these options do not provided any meaningful obfuscation, because
perltidy can be used to reformat the files.  
A useful application of B<--mangle> is the following:

  perltidy -mangle myfile.pl -st | perltidy -o myfile.pl.new

This will form the maximum possible number of one-line blocks (see next
section), and can sometimes help clean up a badly formatted script.

=item  One-line blocks 

There are a few points to note regarding one-line blocks.  A one-line
block is something like this,

	if ($x > 0) { $y = 1 / $x }  

where the contents within the curly braces is short enough to fit
on a single line.

With few exceptions, Perltidy retains existing one-line blocks, if it
is possible within the line-length constraint, but it does not attempt
to form new ones.  In other words, Perltidy will try to follow the
one-line block style of the input file.

If an existing one-line block is longer than the maximum line length,
however, it will be broken into multiple lines.  When this happens, perltidy
checks for and adds any optional terminating semicolon (unless the B<-nasc>
option is used) if the block is a code block.  

The main exception is that Perltidy will attempt to form new one-line
blocks following the keywords C<map>, C<eval>, and C<sort>, because
these code blocks are often small and most clearly displayed in a single
line.

Occasionally it is helpful to introduce line breaks in lists containing
a '=>' symbol, which is sometimes called a "comma-arrow".  To force
perltidy to introduce breaks in a one-line block containing comma
arrows, use the B<--break-after-comma-arrows>, or B<-baa>, flag.  For
example, given the following single line, Perltidy will not add any line
breaks:

    bless { B => $B, Root => $Root } => $package;   -nbaa (default)

To introduce breaks to show the structure, use B<-baa>:

    bless {                                         -baa
        B    => $B,
        Root => $Root
    } => $package;

One-line block rules can conflict with the cuddled-else option.  When
the cuddled-else option is used, perltidy retains existing one-line
blocks, even if they do not obey cuddled-else formatting.

=item  Debugging 

The following flags are available for debugging:

B<-dump-defaults>  will write the default option set to standard output and quit

B<-dump-options>   will write current option set to standard output and quit.

B<-dump-long-names>   will write all command line long names (passed 
to Get_options) to standard output and quit.

B<-dump-short-names>   will write all command line short names 
to standard output and quit.

B<-dump-token-types>   will write a list of all token types 
to standard output and quit.

B<-dump-want-left-space>   will write the hash %want_left_space
to standard output and quit.  See the section on controlling whitespace
around tokens.

B<-dump-want-right-space>   will write the hash %want_right_space
to standard output and quit.  See the section on controlling whitespace
around tokens.

B<-DEBUG>  will write a file with extension F<.DEBUG> for each input file 
showing the tokenization of all lines of code.

=item Working with MakeMaker, AutoLoader and SelfLoader

The first $VERSION line of a file which might be eval'd by MakeMaker
is passed through unchanged except for indentation.  
Use B<--nopass-version-line>, or B<-npvl>, to deactivate this feature.

If the AutoLoader module is used, perltidy will continue formatting
code after seeing an __END__ line.
Use B<--nolook-for-autoloader>, or B<-nlal>, to deactivate this feature.

Likewise, if the SelfLoader module is used, perltidy will continue formatting
code after seeing a __DATA__ line.
Use B<--nolook-for-selfloader>, or B<-nlsl>, to deactivate this feature.


=item Writing an HTML file

The flag B<-html> causes perltidy to write an html file with extension
F<.html>.  
So, for example, the following command

	perltidy -html somefile.pl

will produce a syntax-colored html file named F<somefile.pl.html>
which may be viewed with a browser.

Documentation for this option has been moved to a separate man
page, perl2web(1).

=back

=head1 LIMITATIONS

=over 4

=item  Parsing Limitations

Perltidy should work properly on most Perl scripts.  It does a lot of
self-checking, but still, it is possible that an error could be
introduced and go undetected.  Therefore, it is essential to make
careful backups and to test reformatted scripts.

The main current limitation is that perltidy does not scan modules
included with 'use' statements.  This makes it necessary to guess the
context of any bare words introduced by such modules.  Perltidy has good
guessing algorithms, but they are not infallible.  When it must guess,
it leaves a message in the log file.

If you encounter a bug, please report it.

=item  What perltidy does not parse and format

Perltidy indents but does not reformat comments and C<qw> quotes. 
Perltidy does not in any way modify the contents of here documents or
quoted text, even if they contain source code.  (You could, however,
reformat them separately).  Perltidy does not format 'format' sections
in any way.  And, of course, it does not modify pod documents.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item Special files when standard input or standard output are used

When standard input is used, the log file, if saved, is F<perltidy.LOG>,
and any errors are written to F<perltidy.ERR> unless the B<-se> flag is
set.  These are saved in the current working directory.  If syntax
checking is used, a temporary copy of the input file will be created in
the current working directory called F<perltidy.TMPI>, but it will be
removed when perltidy finishes.

When standard output and syntax checking are used, a temporary copy of the
output file will be created in the current working directory called
F<perltidy.TMPO>.  It will be removed when perltidy finishes.

=item Files overwritten

The following file extensions are used by perltidy, and files with these
extensions may be overwritten or deleted: F<.tdy>, F<.ERR>, F<.LOG>, F<.TEE>,
F<.TMPI>, F<.TMPO>.

=item  Files extensions limitations

Perltidy does not operate on files for which the run could produce a file with
a duplicated file extension.  These extensions are F<.tdy>, F<.LOG>, F<.ERR>,
F<.TEE>, F<.TMPI>, F<.TMPO>.  The purpose of this rule is to prevent generating
confusing filenames such as F<somefile.tdy.tdy.tdy>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

perl2web(1), perlstyle(1)

=head1 VERSION

This man page documents perltidy version 20010903.

=head1 AUTHOR

  Steven L. Hancock
  email: perltidy at users.sourceforge.net
  http://perltidy.sourceforge.net

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2000, 2001 by Steven L. Hancock

=head1 LICENSE

This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the "GNU General Public License".

Please refer to the file "COPYING" for details.

=head1 DISCLAIMER

This package is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

See the "GNU General Public License" for more details.
